> As our faith in the future plummets and the present blends with the past, we doom-scroll and catastrophize and feel certain that we’ve reached the point where history has fallen apart.

A new book takes us through a half century of endless artistic revivals, a period during which we kept a constant backward glance.

Nobody is more nostalgic than diarists, who believe that no moment has been fully lived until it’s been recorded and made available for later reawakening. And, for both diarists and non-diarists, probably no nostalgic pangs are keener than those felt for a time through which they never lived at all. My own diary tells me that, in Rome on October 19, 1989, “I knew as I looked up at the Temple of Antoninus and Faustina, a sharp, beautiful, half-ruin against the lowering sun, that I was not feeling anything of ancient Rome—just the Rome of my 19th-century Englishmen, the Rome of twilight, crumblings & white melancholy.” I was longing for Keats and Shelley and Arthur Hugh Clough, men I knew through books, and who themselves had visited a Rome they knew only through their reading.

The Polish sociologist Zygmunt Bauman, in a brief volume called “Retrotopia” (2017), cited the seventeenth-century tendency to consider nostalgia “eminently curable”; it could be treated with opium or with “a trip to the mountains.” Such a journey would likely be futile, however, unless one had been born in the particular mountains selected as a destination. Other scholars of nostalgia have noted that until the nineteenth century it was regarded as more a geographic longing than a temporal one, homesickness for a place rather than for an era. Bauman himself saw it as “but one member of the rather extended family of affectionate relationship with an ‘elsewhere’ ” -something that can be found in the vast “optionality of human choices.” As Virginia Woolf once mused on the difficulty of attending the opera, “Wherever I seat myself, I die in exile.” Nostalgia’s pain can be exquisite, and many of those susceptible to it have sought to cultivate rather than banish the condition. In the same seventeenth century that prescribed methods of relief for nostalgia, writers like Milton and Burton went hunting for twinges of wistfulness as if they were magic mushrooms.

Nostalgia has broad artistic and political dimensions; it is a matter of cultural consequence. It also never ceases to be a private preoccupation—sometimes a harmless solace and occasionally a dangerous indulgence. The term “nostalgie de la boue,” originating in the mid-nineteenth century, describes a primal longing for the “mud” of depravity on which the fleurs du mal can float. Viewed most harshly, nostalgia is the mud itself, a mental quicksand in which we allow the past to drown the present.

---

The latest study of the subject is Tobias Becker’s “Yesterday: A New History of Nostalgia” (Harvard), which is so respectful of the past that it promises to be “cautious and careful” while “considering all texts on nostalgia, no matter when they appeared, as primary sources.” The author’s deference reaches a point where his own work becomes more historiography than history. Becker delves into volume after academic volume on the subject (Bauman’s “Retrotopia” was preceded, some six years earlier, by Simon Reynolds’s “Retromania”) and finds a remarkable consistency within “the existing literature”: for centuries now, the verdict on nostalgia has been “overwhelmingly pejorative.”

Historians have rendered this judgment more vociferously than anyone else, as if only they should be allowed visitation rights with the past. Politicians seeking victory in the present display surprising unanimity in deploring, or at least cautioning against, nostalgia. In its adjectival form, the word is almost always, Becker demonstrates, a “political insult,” even when uttered by a reactionary. From the liberal side, Arthur M. Schlesinger, Jr., inveighed against nostalgia in his mid-nineteen-fifties indictment of the New Conservatism, though he fell gauzily into the mood a decade later, once the New Frontier had become another lost and longed-for country. Becker doesn’t note Schlesinger’s sentimental lapse, or the way George McGovern, a left-wing Democrat, accepted the Party’s 1972 Presidential nomination with the refrain “Come home, America!,” wrapping temporal nostalgia for lost ideals inside figurative language derived from nostalgia’s older, spatial sense.

But Becker is generally convincing in showing the whole political spectrum’s reluctance to be caught trafficking in any direct invocation of the concept. Irving Kristol assured potential liberal converts that neo-conservatism was “resolutely free of nostalgia,” and George Will located Ronald Reagan’s only nostalgic impulse in the way “he wants to return to the past’s way of facing the future,” which was to say, from a non-defeatist posture. Becker hardly seems a deep student of Reagan, but he’s correct in pointing out the surprising infrequency with which Reagan referred to the nineteen-fifties, the decade where his opponents presumed his heart lay. Word-search quantification reveals that Reagan “used the term future more often than past, god, peace, and even freedom; the only term he used more often was America.”

Margaret Thatcher, however often she might have invoked her hardworking grocer father, generally regarded the past as a place where she wouldn’t be caught dead. After a flirtation with “Victorian values” in the run-up to her second term, she swapped them out for “fundamental” ones. During her time in office, she cut government funding for museums, in keeping with her over-all austerity, but also out of a personal aversion to museums themselves. A radical modernizer, she was happy to pose atop a bulldozer for the demolition of London’s Broad Street station, which had been open since 1865.

Nostalgia has been offered as a blunt instrument of explanation for both Brexit and Trump. Becker shows that proponents of Brexit talked surprisingly little about the past and tried, in fact, to hang nostalgia’s toxic millstone around the necks of Remainers, accusing them of a softhearted attachment to the now sclerotic dream of European unity. With “Make America Great Again” as his slogan, Trump could hardly deny his own embrace of nostalgia, though Becker says that he “neither employed nostalgic tropes nor referred to any specific events or periods in the past.” He instead let his listeners drift off into their own “meanings, memories, and feelings.” He may, however, if only unconsciously, have parsed the MAGA acronym more finely than Becker himself does. Trump promised to make America great again, but he never said that greatness would look like it had before. His would be a new greatness, a gold-plated authoritarian spectacle; no more barbershop harmonies coming from the village band shell but, rather, a single voice blaring from the stadium loudspeaker.

Still, with whatever sleight of hand, Trump added to nostalgia’s terrible civic reputation. Because the word, Becker argues, is “ideally suited to pathologize”—a label that puts one’s opponent beyond a mental and moral pale—those on the left, for instance, will often insist that people overtly inclined to nostalgia are really seeking a fig leaf for their own racism. Becker’s prudent book considers the word a reflexive smear “unsuitable for analytical purposes.” His boldest proposal is that nostalgia “be struck from the political vocabulary altogether.”

Despite the scorn that electoral politics may profess toward nostalgia, we practice it culturally all the time. “Yesterday” takes us through endless artistic revivals throughout the past half century, a period during which, as technology frog-marched us into the future, we kept a constant backward glance. The long era we’re in now seems not so much postmodern as re-everything.

In the nineteen-seventies, popular culture’s resuscitation of the fifties, from “American Graffiti” to “Happy Days” and “Grease,” was so kitschy and commercial and catchy—a sort of surround-sound earworm—that the revival really did become the “transnational phenomenon” that Becker pronounces it to be. He also lists many seventies films set in the twenties and thirties, including “They Shoot Horses, Don’t They?,” “Paper Moon,” “The Sting,” “The Way We Were,” “The Godfather: Part II,” “Chinatown,” and “The Day of the Locust,” and speculates on the connection of this retrospection to Vietnam, Watergate, and other then contemporary convulsions. But he doesn’t differentiate between films with original stories—i.e., those whose makers may have been drawn to a period—and those which adapted works created in the earlier time. Is there not a crucial imaginative distinction? What, exactly, is experiencing revival: the era or the art?

When it comes to both high and popular art, there is usually a feeling that nostalgia must earn its keep, that what’s being brought back must arrive not only with feel-good vibes but also with a certain transformational power. Just as Ezra Pound’s rallying cry for modernism—“Make it new”—helped turn the Odyssey into “Ulysses,” postmodern entertainments are similarly called upon to alchemize, rather than simply recognize, what they’re unearthing. Becker finds the roots of punk, for example, in the earliest rock-and-roll revivals, which is perhaps enough to justify his assertion that such “revivals can be a creative force themselves.” Vivienne Westwood hunted fashion’s past with vampiric glee, making any oddball element, from a pirate’s hat to a corset, appear to be doing the work of the present. She also kept it up decade after decade, even though, as Becker points out, revivals are generally spearheaded by the young, as if a sort of FOHMO—fear of having missed out—obtains.

Still, reanimations are not always performed to bestow homage or to harvest imaginative nutrients. At times, nostalgia can devolve into a kind of hate-watching, as the pleasures of self-satisfaction and superior knowledge drip from one’s present-day vantage. Modern architecture, for instance, with its penchant for “ironic reference” (see Tom Wolfe’s “From Bauhaus to Our House”), often seems to mock, through brutally streamlined imitation, the older ornamental elements that it refers to. Becker notes that even George Lucas’s beloved “American Graffiti” was really an “anti-nostalgia film,” offered more as a cautionary tale than as a warm bath; its message, Lucas himself maintained, was “to ‘move forward’ and to ‘accept change.’ ” Thornton Wilder’s “Our Town” (1938), usually produced as a wholesome chestnut of theatrical nostalgia, has always decried our inability to bring a full awareness to the current moment: “Do any human beings ever realise life while they live it . . . every, every minute?” Emily asks the Stage Manager, the play’s Everyman deity. Monty Python’s famous “Four Yorkshire-men” sketch is an absurdist riff on nostalgia itself, its quartet of old buffers wallowing in pseudo-memories of deprivation, competing for pride of place with the sheer awfulness of the pasts that they invent.

Well before nostalgia underwent its etymological shift and became the yearning for a period instead of a place, the concept of time itself had changed, Becker writes, from being mostly a respect for the past to a faith in the future, one that would be a great long march through “continual improvement.” Modern debates over the importance of preserving the built environment, nostalgia’s physical warehouse, have pitted this persistent sense of progress against a more recent one, “in which past and present intersected and overlapped, as they often do in the material fabric of a city.” According to Becker, “presentism” -not just the imposition of current values onto the past but any exclusive preoccupation with the here and now -has become nearly “as much a term of abuse as nostalgia.” He supports a dual consciousness of both past and present called “pluritemporality,” a German theorist’s coinage that one can only hope is never again uttered by anyone’s tongue or keyboard.

Even so, as faith in the future now enters a sort of planetary free fall, it seems less and less disputable that past and present are beginning to blend, as if the latter needed a frequent assist from the former. There is also no denying a new retro-seeking speed (the eighties had been pop-culturally revived before the mid-nineties were even over) and no avoiding how different past eras have begun simultaneously to flicker in the collective imagination, coming and going with little regard for sequence, context, or sense. Simon Reynolds, approvingly quoted by Becker, speaks of our “putting history into shuffle mode,” thanks to the lily-pad linkages of the Web and the everything-available-all-at-once nudgings of YouTube. Much as the pocket calculator long ago caused arithmetic skills to atrophy, newer technologies have made history ubiquitous instead of chronological, let alone explanatory. Mashups are now constructed with no real deliberateness but as part of a steady acquisitive spree through the videos that crowd our screens. We doomscroll and catastrophize and feel a Yeatsian certainty that we’ve reached the point where “things fall apart,” while history itself congeals into its own gluey casserole. To take a trivial, innocent example: How many young viewers of “Grease” understand that the film is in fact a backward glance from five decades ago to seven?

But pedantry and self-consciousness can wreck the pleasures of nostalgia. At the end of “Our Town,” the now dead Emily is warned by the Stage Manager not to exercise the privilege of going back to haunt a day that remains lovely in her memory: if one does that, “you not only live it; but you watch yourself living it.” Just as death ruins life, the present ruins the past. What one wants is to sink deeper, more completely, into the past—a desire that prevents any artistic revival, whether it’s a new treatment of an old era or a remake of an existing work, from giving full satisfaction. One’s critical and comparative faculties can never be fully suspended.

“Casablanca” (1942) was filmed from a famously unstable and rewritten script. From day to day, the actors weren’t sure how the story would turn out, just as they didn’t know how the war would end and who would win it. This double lack of knowledge surely contributed to the movie’s everlasting immediacy: the film feels so authentically like the past because it was so entirely about the present. It has probably inspired more feelings of nostalgia than any other movie, no matter that its famous song insists that everything fundamental stays the same as time goes by.

Professional historians keep fighting a rearguard action against those idly using the past to entertain themselves on their phones and televisions. Academics also tend to scoff at those possessing a semi-serious, if still informal, interest in earlier times. Personal genealogical research, Becker reminds us, is “the third most common use of the internet after shopping and pornography.” Some of those pursuing it are just casually curious, happy to see an electronic green leaf ping to life, or to throw down some spit into the 23andMe saliva kit. Others are taking what feels like refuge in an earlier time, or seeking a more solid sense of an ethnic identity that can shape their own outlooks and politics. Those still enjoying weekend reënactments are gradually losing their costumes to the reckonings demanded by a new moral vision, and yet the semi-informed avocations of hobby history may do less harm than spoofs and skits in which the very idea of history is deemed a joke. TikTok is no longer the sound of time passing on the grandfather clock; it’s the upward swipe, whatever, from one thing to the next.

In 1978, the actress Simone Signoret published a memoir titled “Nostalgia Isn’t What It Used to Be.” Of course, what it used to be—the obsolete mood Signoret was recalling—wasn’t what it had been even before that. Most compelling, nostalgia’s centuries-ago transformation from geographic to temporal may now be on the verge of reversing itself, as more earthlings find themselves on the run, fleeing and fearful, than at any time since Signoret first caught the public’s attention, during the Second World War.

Writing in 1987, Joseph Brodsky observed that “displacement and misplacement are the century’s commonplace.” From here in the twentieth century’s successor, one’s reaction to that is likely to be a phrase that any real nostalgic uses only rarely: you ain’t seen nothin’ yet. Today’s Syrians and Afghans and Sudanese and Ukrainians and Central Americans are, it can be said, the desperate forerunners of the climate refugees already trudging in their wake. Their homesickness will be incurable, something that—if they’re lucky, after long transit and constant rebuff—will be only half alleviated by someone’s grudging offer of a new home.

At the millennium, we worried about our overdeveloped tendency toward irony, which the then young writer Jedediah Purdy, in a now quaint book called “For Common Things” (1999), linked to our being “almost devastatingly self-aware,” locked into a default mode of debunking. We seemed to be developing a brittle incapacity to accept, let alone honor, the tender, tragic feeling that had always lain beneath the ordinary person’s experience of nostalgia. In his once famous essay “Old China,” Charles Lamb located nostalgia in “the hope that youth brings” and which time extinguishes. What we are always most nostalgic for is, in fact, the future, the one we imagined only to see it turn into the past. The actress Helen Hayes used to tell a story of how her young prospective husband poured some peanuts into her hand and said, “I wish they were emeralds.” Years later, when he was actually able to give her a little bag of emeralds, he did so saying, “I wish they were peanuts”—which, with whatever excess of sweetness, about sums it up. Nostalgia is built into us, even more apt to be triggered by the elemental senses—smell and taste and touch—than by the sights and sounds out of which those revivals of fashion and music are constructed.

Becker’s book has plenty of interest, but it is flawed by the author’s tendency to regard nostalgia as an idea instead of an emotion, which makes it seem a vaguely shameful mental choice that we should somehow be able to reason ourselves out of. While allowing that nostalgia may have its artistic uses, in the inspiration those revivals provide, the author doesn’t really consider its psychological utility. In 2013, the Times reported on the research of Dr. Constantine Sedikides and his contribution to the development of the Southampton Nostalgia Scale: “Nostalgia has been shown to counteract loneliness, boredom and anxiety. It makes people more generous to strangers and more tolerant of outsiders. Couples feel closer and look happier when they’re sharing nostalgic memories. On cold days, or in cold rooms, people use nostalgia to literally feel warmer.”

Nostalgia goes even deeper than that, so deep that one wonders if it isn’t a neurological condition, something fundamental and immune to the vagaries of history. As people begin living beyond their Biblical allotment of seventy years, they experience the first exaggerated panics over forgetting a name or a date, which is usually remedied by a Google search. But then comes the growing realization that short-term memory has nothing like the staying power of the long-term variety. Mentally, the seven ages of man speed up their full-circling, until the past’s sovereignty over the present is complete. The further along one gets, the more one understands that the past is indeed another country, and that, moreover, it is home. Long-term memory’s domination of short may be a hardwired consolation that nature and biology have mercifully installed in us.

More than five hundred years have passed since François Villon composed what may be the most familiar nostalgic line in all of poetry: “But where are the snows of yesteryear?” It has never in all the centuries since needed a gloss. Whatever nostalgia’s thermal utility may be, according to the Southampton Nostalgia Scale, the world’s rooms are getting warmer all on their own. The difference between now and Villon’s fourteen-sixties is that his poem’s current auditor is likely to hear its question being posed not metaphorically but as a matter of sobering fact. We also now wonder whether artificial intelligence may be what puts us out of our misery before we’re burned to a crisp. Perhaps, as has been suggested, our A.I. worries will years from now turn out to have been just another passing apocalyptic fancy, on the order of Y2K. But if A.I. becomes the extinguishing event, we can be certain that nostalgia will be the last real thing we feel.